Alex Martelli giving the SciPy2008 Keynote
##########################################

:date: 2008-06-14 19:08
:tags: scipy, conferences

On behalf of the `SciPy2008 conference`_ organizing committee, I am
happy to announce that the Keynote at the conference will be given by
Alex Martelli.

It is a pleasure for us to receive Alex. He currently works as "Uber
Tech Leader" at Google and is the author of two of the Python classics:
"Python in a nutshell" and the "Python CookBook". Alex graduated in
electronic engineering from the university of Bologna and worked in chip
design first for Texas Instrument, and later for IBM Research. During
the 8 years he spent at IBM, he gradually shifted from hardware design
to software development while winning three Outstanding Technical
Achievement Awards. Then he joined think3 inc., and Italian CAD company,
as Senior Software Consultant where he developed libraries, network
protocols, GUI engines, event frameworks, and web access frontends.
After 12 years at think3, he worked for 3 years as a freelance
consultant, mostly doing Python development, before joining Google.

Alex won the 2002 Activators' Choice Award, and the 2006 Frank Willison
award for outstanding contributions to the Python community.

Alex has also taught courses on programming, development methods,
object-oriented design, and numerical computing, at Ferrara University
(Italy) and other venues.Â  Alex's proudest achievement is the articles
that appeared in Bridge World (January/February 2000), which were hailed
as giant steps towards solving issues that had haunted contract-bridge
game theoreticians for decades.

This biography was loosely adapted from Alex's autobiography
(http://www.aleax.it/bio.txt), more information can be found on his
website http://www.aleax.it .

.. _SciPy2008 conference: http://conference.scipy.org
