==================================================================
Hiring a programmer for a brain imaging machine-learning library
==================================================================

:date: 2014-02-12
:tags: jobs, neuroimaging, python

**Work with us on putting machine learning in the hand of cognitive
scientists**

Parietal is a research team that creates advanced data analysis to mine
functional brain images and solve medical and cognitive science problems.
Our day to day work is to write machine-learning and statistics code to
understand and use better images of brain function (most often fMRI). Our
purpose is to be useful to the NeuroImaging community, mostly medical and
cognitive science researched, to understand brain function better. What
is limiting us in this respect is that to reach end users we need to turn
our algorithms in usable software.

This is why Parietal has a long tradition of investing in building an
ecosystem of `high-quality libraries and tools
<https://team.inria.fr/parietal/software>`_: we build, layer by layer, an
environment in which we can do our research, and with which we hope to
one day reach the user. We choose Python, as a high-level general purpose
language with which we can do scientific computing, and, one day, GUIs,
or web servers. We contribute to the scipy ecosystem; we have built the
foundations of the most successful Python machine learning library,
`scikit-learn <http://scikit-learn>`_. We are invested in the
`neuroimaging in Python ecosystem <http://nipy.org>`_. Our students, our
team members, send patches to scientific Python projects, teach courses
on how to use them, speak at conferences.

But to go all the way, we need support from people who do software as
there sole goal. To put the finishing touch on the quality of our
end-user libraries, we need full-time programmers. In an academic
setting, they can be hard to justify, but we have always had dedicate
top-notch engineers at Parietal, our latest hire being the well-known
`Olivier Grisel <http://ogrisel.com/>`_. This is where **you** can come
in.

The `NiConnect
<https://team.inria.fr/parietal/research/spatial_patterns/niconnect/>`_
is a specific research project in which we are developing leading
algorithmic tools. For this project, we have funding for a full-time
programmer. Someone that will help us make from our understand of how to
process brain images, a software tool that an cognitive science
researcher can use. We have started work on such a software, in the
`nilearn <http://nilearn.github.io/>`_ project. What we need is someone
who drives the project, and makes sure that the piece fit in together
well. That the code to solve the user's problem is not our research code,
but a clean and lean library, just like scikit-learn is an elegant
answer to day-to-day machine learning tasks.


If you want more details, they can be found on the `job offer
<https://team.inria.fr/parietal/job-offers>`_. This post is to motivate
the job in a personal, that I cannot give in an official posting.

Why take this job?
===================

I don't expect some to take this job only because it pays the bill. To be
clear, the kind of person I am looking for has no difficulties finding a
well-payed job elsewhere. So, if you are that person, why would you take
the job.

* To join `a great team <https://team.inria.fr/parietal/team-members/>`_
  that is focused on finding elegant solutions to hard problems at the
  intersection of machine learning, cognitive science, and software.
  Choose to work with great people, knowledgeable, passionate, and `fun
  <https://team.inria.fr/parietal/inria-winter-party-2014/>`_.

* To work on interesting problems, that matter. They are interesting
  because they are challenging but we have the skills to solve them. They
  matter because these skills need to be used to make brain research
  better.

* To have a boss (`me <https://github.com/GaelVaroquaux>`_) that
  actually codes and gives you feedback on your code.

* To learn. Data science + Python is *the* combination of skills to have.
  We have a at Parietal a unique expertise in these. And add to it fine
  understanding of algorithms, high performance computing, statistics,
  and software quality. You have the perfect lines on a CV.

What would make me excited in a resume?
========================================

* Open source contributions (there is no better coding CV than a github
  account).

* Experience in agile-like situations

* A passion for code quality

* Good Python experience

* The unlikely combination of research-like training (eg undergraduate)
  and experience in a non academic and non scientific setting (say web
  development).

* To know that you care about user experience, about understanding and
  solving the user's problems.

_____

Now if you are interested and feel up for the challenge, read the real
`job offer <https://team.inria.fr/parietal/job-offers>`_, and send me
your resume.
