Job offering for junior Python developer
########################################

:date: 2009-06-07 19:53
:tags: python, scipy, scientific computing, jobs

Our lab is seeking to hire an engineer to work on porting our machine
learning code to the scikit learn, adding tests and documentation and
packaging it.

We are looking for someone motivated by quality in software and open
source. No prior scientific computing experience is required. You will
be working in a highly stimulating research environment (`Neurospin`_),
near Paris and employed by the French research institute in computer
science and applied math (`INRIA`_), a prestigious institution.

`Neurospin`_ is a research institute dedicated to the understanding of
the brain. You will be working with computer-assisted neurology
laboratory, the image-analysis and branch of Neurospin, in the small
'Parietal' INRIA team embedded in NeuroSpin and dedicated to statistical
modeling.

Over the years, the lab has developed a set of tools for machine
learning and statistical analysis in Python (with some C). There are
some tools for this purpose available in the open-source world
(BSD-licensed) in the scikit learn. We want to extract the good and
unique parts of our internal library, and release it in the open source
world through the scikit learn. Our code is fully Python code, using
scipy and matlab, with some bindings to R. As we want the code to be
BSD-licensed, we will remove the bindings with R, and replace when
possible. The job does not involve developing new algorithms, but
testing, improving, and documenting the existing one. There is a big
quality assurance work to be done. The code needs to be put to the right
coding standards; APIs should be cleaned; tests added. Dead code should
be delete. There is some optimization work to be done. Also, if there is
any duplicated funcitonnality with the scikit learn, you should analyse
both code and determine which one to code. The job also involves working
with the community, documentating the code, and releasing the project,
including binary packages. And finally, all the original authors of the
algorithms, and experts in the field, are in the lab. So you will be
able to learn from them and pester them if there is a problem with the
code.

In one word, this is about transforming an internal project, into a
leading open source project that will rock and live on!

The job description is available `here`_.

There are to caveats: first it is a 2 year position. Second, you need to
have graduated recently (how recently I don't know exactly, but I will
inquire).

If you are interested, or just want to ask questions, don't hesitate to
send me an e-mail, I am \_really\_ looking forward to collaborate with
someone motivated on this project.

**UPDATE:** I have more details on the restrictions of the job offering:
you need to have graduated in 2008 or 2009. This is a very hard
restriction, and I am recieving many excellent CVs that I even consider
because of this restriction. I am sorry, I cannot do anything about
it\ **.**

.. _Neurospin: http://www-dsv.cea.fr/neurospin/
.. _INRIA: http://www.inria.fr/saclay/home/view?set_language=en
.. _here: http://www.inria.fr/travailler/mrted/fr/jd/details.html?id=PGTFK026203F3VBQB6G68LONZ&LOV5=4510&ContractType=4545&LG=FR&Resultsperpage=20&nPostingID=3487&nPostingTargetID=7675&option=52&sort=DESC&nDepartmentID=10
