Numpy documentation editor
##########################

:date: 2008-10-27 00:50
:tags: scipy, publishing

Pauli Virtanen and myself have finally finished transfering the numpy
documentation editor to http://docs.scipy.org. The documentation editor
is a project that has been mainly championed by Pauli. It allows you to
edit in a wiki-like fashion the documentation for numpy, including the
docstring. The changes are reviewed by editors, and eventually merged in
the numpy svn. As a result, they are shipped with numpy and end up on
everybody's install of numpy.

the documentation editor has been deployed during the summer on my
girlfriend's hosted server, but we where afraid it wouldn't scale there
(and beside using my girlfriend's server was not ideal). The
contributions made throught the web portal have already helped improve
the numpy documentation tremendously. It is a pleasure to look at the
docstring of a function and find it actually helpful. Now that it is
hosted on the main scipy servers, we are no longer afraid of making as
much publicity as possible around it. So please, go straight to
http://docs.scipy.org and start improving the docs. More seriously, when
you think a feature is poorly documented, when you have faught for a few
hours to understand how a function works, improve the docs, it is very
easy, and if everybody does this, you'll save time too.

In the long run we would like to get scipy itself under the same
mechanism, and I would love to open the service to other major Python
scientific computing librairies that form the scipy ecosystem.
