Scipy2008 Early-bird registration deadline ends today
#####################################################

:date: 2008-07-11 09:15
:tags: python, scipy, scientific computing, conferences

I have been planning to make a more interesting post highlighting the
large trends of the SciPy2008 conference, but it is 3AM local time, and
I am still hacking on Mayavi, so I think I'll keep it short.

As far a the `conference program`_ goes, we can see a few major themes
emerging. There will be talks about the use of Python for scientific
works, but also talks about the growing stack of Python scientific
tools. Interesting trends are the non-purely-numerical tools: symbolic
and graph theory, and the race towards more optimisation through
compilation from Python code. In addition this year we see a major
effort on documentation. I think this is the sign of a numerical stack
that is maturing.

As for `the tutorials`_, I am personnally very interested in the
advanced track tutorial. The newest and coolest technologies, like
Cython, are also not the one I know best, and we have the chance to be
able to listen to their authors presenting them.

**The early bird registration deadline is ending tomorrow**, as I point
out in my title. If you miss this deadline, the conference fees will be
higher, and the reason is simply that late registration makes
organisation harder and more expensive. I would be happier if everybody
registered before this deadline and paid less. I am not too sure what
the accountant would say.

.. _conference program: http://conference.scipy.org/conference
.. _the tutorials: http://conference.scipy.org/tutorials
