Student sponsorship for the SciPy08 conference
##############################################

:date: 2008-06-27 05:26
:tags: scipy, conferences

I am delighted to announce that the Python Software Foundation has
answered our call and is providing sponsoring to the `SciPy08
conference`_.

**We will use this money to sponsor the registration fees and travel for
up to 10 college or graduate students to attend the conference**. The
PSF did not provide all the founds required for all 10 students and once
again Enthought Inc. (http://www.enthought.com) is stepping up to fill
in[1].

**To apply, please send a short description of what you are studying and
why you'd like to attend to info@enthought.com**. Please include
telephone contact information.

From my perspective, this is excellent news. First of all this means
that the SciPy community is working a bit more closely with the PSF and
the broader Python community. But the is also very dear to me as last
year I was sponsored as a student to come to the SciPy conference. I got
to meet fantastic people and discover thrilling new developments. This
was the beginning of a move away of my core physics activity to a more
software-related work, and the realization that yes, I could do it, I
could maybe contribute something useful to the community (well, I'll let
you judge that). Thanks a lot to Travis Vaught from Enthought for
bringing this project to a success.

[1] I feel like we (the SciPy community) are like an aging teenager,
wanting a lot of independence, but still living a lot out of parent's
money (Enthought). And I feel the first concerned, as I am spending the
summer working at Enthought to get a chance to work on interesting
SciPy-related projects.

Disclaimer: The second part of this post reflects my own opinions, and
not those of my employer (obviously) or the SciPy08 organising comittee.

.. _SciPy08 conference: http://conference.scipy.org
